Good afternoon, everybody.
I'm Chris Espinosa.
I head the Components and
Scripting group at Apple.
If you've been to a few developers'
conferences and the AppleScript sessions,
I should be dullingly familiar by now.
I'm going to be with you
the rest of the afternoon.
I'm standing between you
and Memorial Day weekend,
so I'm going to make it crisp.
I'm going to try to make it clear,
and I'm going to make it
entirely Mac OS X focused.
What we're here to talk about
today is the yearly update
on the status of AppleScript,
primarily focused on Mac OS X and the key
changes in Mac OS X that affect you as
scripters and affect you as developers.
The first session is going to be
mostly for scripters and developers.
The second session will be exclusively
for people writing software for Mac OS X.
So if you are a scripter,
you can go play some pinball
during the second session,
and then we'll see you at the
feedback forum immediately following.
I am going to talk in the first
session about things we are
going to change in the future,
things we know about in AppleScript 1.6,
things we know about in Mac OS X that
we're going to be addressing,
but I'll be dealing
with that only briefly.
There's not a lot of forward-looking
promises in this session.
It's going to be focused primarily
on shipping apps and getting
your scripts running on Mac OS X.
What you'll learn is the new features
of AppleScript 1.6 in Mac OS 9 and
Mac OS X that you can take advantage of,
what to do about your scripts
and scripting additions,
how to move them across,
where to put them, things like that,
and how to plan for changes that
we expect in future versions.
But first, I want to thank all the
developers who shipped scriptable
applications this year.
I couldn't fit it all on one screen.
There are a lot of people that
did updates to their applications.
They shipped Mac OS X versions.
They shipped new code, and I really,
really appreciate your getting
behind the platform and keeping
your scriptable applications
alive and fresh for Mac OS X.
And as usual, we had some version
interesting things this year.
Notice that we didn't do a .0.1 release.
I consider that a personal triumph,
is that most of the stuff we shipped
was good the first time around.
We shipped AppleScript 1.5 in
the customer beta for Mac OS X.
We shipped AppleScript 1.5.5
in the Mac OS 9.1 release,
and it was a version of the
Mac OS X version backported to Mac OS 9,
and it had a few problems.
And when we came out with Mac OS X,
we shipped 1.6 on Mac OS X,
and then shortly thereafter as
a software update for Mac OS 9.
I highly recommend that you
run AppleScript 1.5 in the
customer beta for Mac OS X.
If you have Mac OS 9.1,
it's really the right
version to be running.
One of the most common
problems that we've seen on the
AppleScript lists is people saying,
Oh, I run my scripts and my
scripting additions aren't there,
and I get all these Chevron
syntax things in my scripts.
And the common thing is people have
turned off their security extensions.
One of the things that we did in 1.5.6,
was allow the mount volume
command to use the keychain,
and in order to do that,
we created a dependency on the
security system extensions.
A lot of people turned those off.
That turned off all of
scripting additions,
and we fixed that in 1.6.
So if you're having problems
that your scripts don't run
or your scripting additions
aren't recognized in Mac OS 9.1,
upgrade to AppleScript 1.6,
and that'll fix it.
Here are some of the new features
that we introduced in 1.5,
1.5.5, and 1.6, basically since the last
time we were here last year.
For developers,
one of the things I'm going
to be covering is that we
introduced into Carbon,
into CarbonLib on Mac OS 9 and into
the Carbon framework in Mac OS X,
the AE Gizmos functionality that
Jens Alfke wrote a low so many years
ago and all of you have been using
as a link library for many years.
We actually built that into
the operating system in 1.5.
Scripters won't notice.
It will have no effect on scripters,
but it will help developers
get their software to Mac OS X.
We added a fix for the double as problem.
I'll be going into that.
If you are frustrated with the finder,
Andy Pachorski is happy.
If you are frustrated with the problem
that when you ask an application
to get something as something else
and you get an error can't coerce,
we have a fix for you.
It requires developers to
modify their applications,
but it allows them to do the right thing.
We are fully supporting Unicode text as
a first class data type in Apple script.
I'll be doing a demo of that.
That's mainly important when
you're using the Mac OS X finder,
either for Mac OS X or from
scripts running in the classic
environment where the Mac OS X finder
is the only finder around.
Mac OS X finder returns its
file names as Unicode text,
and if your scripts were expecting
standard strings and were doing
operations such as concatenation
or text extraction on them,
it would have failed in 1.5 and 1.5.5.
Now it works in 1.6 because we have
fully first class Unicode text support.
We added support for packaged apps and
packaged scripting editions for Mac OS X,
support for script files that don't
have type in creators and have all of
their script code in the data fork,
and that's a fix.
We have a Mac OS X convention so
that you can actually send a script
across the internet as a single
file without having to bin hex it or
compress it or do anything like that.
It'll actually work when
you get it to the other end.
And we have a different methodology
for dispatching events to
scripting editions on Mac OS X.
I'll talk a little bit about that.
We also fixed some bugs.
Some of these you didn't know about.
Some of these you've relied
on and now you have to change.
I don't think you relied on middle
item of an empty list crashing.
It's a convenient way to crash
your machine if you need to,
but we fixed that.
Item zero of a list used to not fail.
It returned silently.
Now it does fail,
and so that should help you
catch some bugs in your scripts
where you're actually trying
to get item zero of a list.
Now it will actually fail,
which is the correct behavior.
The Info4 scripting edition
couldn't handle files greater
than two gigabytes in size.
Now it can, files and folders.
The text-to-Unicode text coercion
assumed that the incoming text was Mac.
Now it looks at what
your system script is,
so if you're running
a non-English system,
the Unicode coercion
will happen correctly.
In random numbers,
if you had similar large seed values,
such as the current time as seconds,
they would produce similar initial random
numbers and then be random after that.
That disturbed some people
because they wanted all the
random numbers to be random rather
than just the second through nth.
So we fixed that.
There's a very interesting problem where,
I guess that's,
I'm going to cast off commas here, one,
two, three, four, five,
536,870,911 plus one equal
negative 536,870,921,
which is not the correct answer.
We fixed that.
And Mount Volume didn't look at keychain,
which some considered a bug.
We considered it a new feature addition.
We added that.
In 1.6,
which is what you get in Mac OS X and
what you get when you do the
software update to Mac OS 9.1,
we fixed some read-write
commands that we broke in 1.5.5.
We just out-and-out
checked in the wrong code,
and we just had to fix it.
A problem that had been creeping
around for quite a long time
was manifesting itself different
in different operating systems.
It was that if you were displaying
the contents of a string and
there was a null character,
an ASCII zero in there,
it would display differently on
different systems at different times.
Sometimes it would just be blank.
Sometimes it would be a backslash.
Sometimes it would be a large
number of garbage characters.
We fixed it so that it now displays
as an ASCII null character.
You can actually copy and
paste and reinterpret.
We believe that that's
the correct behavior now.
You will see it.
It will look like an empty string in
most fonts because most fonts don't have
a glyph for the ASCII zero character.
But it's actually a string
with one character in there,
which is an ASCII zero.
If you copy and paste it,
the right thing will happen.
[Transcript missing]
There are some bugs we know about in 1.6.
These are things we've found since
the introduction of 1.6 that we will
be fixing in subsequent versions.
The Info4 scripting edition
fails if you target it at a
Unix or an NFS file system.
Don't try it.
We'll be fixing it.
The low-level Unicode
text-to-text coercion is broken,
so that if you get type Unicode text
as an application developer and you
try to use the low-level coercion,
the Apple Event Manager coercion
to coerce it to a type char,
that will fail.
If you try to coerce it
to a type styled text,
that will succeed,
and the type styled text is a record,
one element of which is the type char.
So that's your workaround.
You coerce it to type styled text,
coerce that to a record,
get the first item of that record,
which is the character element,
and then that will be your plain text.
And we'll be fixing that.
The mount volume command broke on
third-party user authentication modules,
and that includes Unix file servers
and Windows 2000 AFP servers.
We're still not sure why it did.
We think it's something that happened
in the Apple Share client itself,
because we didn't change any of
the mount volume code in this area.
We're trying to get
to the bottom of that,
but in the next version...
We will make sure that
Mountain Volume works on
all major AFP platforms.
The read as list using
delimiters is broken.
So even though we fixed
the read-write OSACs,
there are still a couple of
little bugs hanging around.
Read as list using
delimiters is one of them.
And sometimes if you...
Send a first event to an application
from a script without launching it first.
The first event will time out,
but subsequent events,
if you rerun the script, it'll work.
We think that that's a subtle timing
problem in the Apple Event Manager or
something that we're doing
wrong with noticing whether
the application is up or not.
We're going to address
that in a future version.
Here are some new features,
and these are primarily for developers.
The AE Helpers,
the support for the double-As problem,
and the Unicode class support.
I'm going to go over each of these.
AE Helpers was born as AE Gizmos.
It's a quick and easier way to deal with
building Apple event descriptor records.
Jens Alfke from the original
AppleScript team wrote
this support library in,
I believe it was something
like 1993 or 1994.
Shipped it as object code.
People have been linking that with
their systems and shipping that.
That object code doesn't link,
doesn't build anymore.
You can't use it on Carbon systems.
And developers have wanted another
link library or access to the
source code or something like that.
We decided just to build that
functionality into Carbon,
into CarbonLib for Mac OS 9 and into
the Carbon framework for Mac OS X.
What do these do?
AE Build and Print are a very easy way to
go between a textual description of your
Apple event and the Apple event itself.
Rather than going through,
because an Apple event, as you know,
can be a deeply nested structure
with descriptors inside
descriptors inside descriptors.
Rather than going through
and building a descriptor,
adding it to another descriptor,
throwing away the original,
coercing it to another descriptor,
throwing away the other one,
adding that to another descriptor,
throwing it away,
each time doing a relatively
heavyweight handle-based memory event.
What AE Build does is it takes a
textual representation of your event,
does substitution,
like in a printf statement,
of your actual variables for
placeholders inside the text event,
and then builds the whole
descriptor or event in one shot,
in one operation.
It's much faster,
it's much lighter weight,
it doesn't create nearly as many
intermediate copies of things,
just gets the job done much faster.
AE Print is sort of
the converse operation.
It takes a descriptor record,
which could be all the
way up to an Apple event,
and then spools it out in a
reinterpretable text form to
make an Apple event readable.
This is very useful in debugging,
and I'm going to show
some examples of that.
The principal routines are AE Build Desk,
which builds a descriptor.
AE Parameters, which adds something to an
already existing descriptor.
Or AE Build Apple Event,
which takes the appropriate parameters
and builds an Apple event all in one.
It's like AE Create Apple Event,
but it lets you specify everything
you need in one statement.
And then the converse event
is the AE Print functionality.
AE Print Desk to Handle
takes a descriptor,
a list, a record, an Apple event,
and it prints it in raw text to a handle,
which then you can print out or dump in
a debug window or something like that.
This text representation
has a syntax all its own,
and so far the only documentation for
it is Jens' original documentation,
which is back in the circa 1993 SDKs.
We're working on updating that,
but for now if you can find an
old copy of that SDK and you can
get the original documentation,
that works.
We've only made a couple of changes.
Jens' original implementation
relied on high ASCII characters,
curly quotes and chevrons,
to encase strings and
hexadecimal strings.
And we've added some straight
ASCII alternatives in case you happen
to be working in an ASCII preferential
development environment.
The hex delimiters are dollar signs,
you know, dollar signs at the
beginning and the end.
And then we've added some straight
ASCII alternatives in case you happen
to be working in an ASCII preferential
development environment.
The hex delimiters are dollar signs,
you know, dollar signs at the
beginning and the end.
And then we've added some straight
ASCII alternatives in case you happen
to be working in an ASCII preferential
development environment.
The hex delimiters are dollar signs,
you know, dollar signs at the
beginning and the end.
And the quote characters
are straight single quotes,
which you then have to escape,
but you're grownups, you can do that.
So the language has constants,
it has a special interpretation
for four character codes,
because most events and descriptors
are built out of four character codes.
You can usually do four character codes
just by typing the four characters.
If there's high ASCII or
something special in there,
then you enclose them in here.
You can use them in single quotes.
The language will do coercions in place.
If you say four character code, paren,
and then some value,
it'll apply that coercion
before it puts it in the event.
And so you can do pretty much coercions
in line in this text descriptor.
I'll show you a little example of that.
You can describe lists and
records in the text format.
And at the bottom you see
the substitution language.
An at sign substitutes an AEDESC.
AEDESC parameter, right in that position.
A double at, a cast,
that is a type and then
an at sign in parentheses,
takes a special structure which
you have to build a struct for,
which is a long of the length and
then a pointer to the actual data.
So you can put arbitrary data in as
long as you create this struct which
has the long and the pointer to it,
the length and the pointer to it.
And then if you have a handle,
when we can find the length of a handle,
because, well, it's a handle.
You just put in two at signs and
then the value of that handle will
be put in at that point in the event.
So here's a basic usage.
This is how you build a
descriptor that says every line,
the equivalent of every line of document,
quote, name, end quote.
It would be that in Apple script.
AE build desk first takes
the destination desk,
a pointer to that,
a pointer to a build error structure
which is really useful for debugging.
This is something that we've
added in the Carbon version.
If there's an error,
we tell you what the error is and
what line of your text it occurred on,
which is very helpful for debugging
the syntax of this string.
And then you pass it the string and
then a variable list of parameters.
And the string we're passing is
first single quote OBJ single quote,
which means we're going to
build an object specifier.
And then parens,
which means we're going to coerce into
an object specifier from something else.
And then the parens are braces,
which means, oh,
we're going to coerce into an
object specifier from a record.
Okay.
Well, that makes sense.
If you're building an object specifier
in straight Apple event calls,
that's what you do.
You build a record and then you
coerce it to an object specifier.
Here instead of making three calls,
we did it in seven characters,
which is really nice.
And then we have our four
fields of our record,
the want, the from, the form,
and the SELD.
And the want is a
CLIN coerced to a type type.
That's nice.
And the form is an
INDX coerced to an enum.
That's exactly what you want.
And the SELD is a type form
absolute position of ALL space.
And because there's space in there,
we have to put that in single quotes.
And then notice the from parameter.
The from is another object specifier.
And see?
We're building an object specifier inside
an object specifier in one system call.
That's what makes it fast.
And the from is another object specifier
built pretty much the same way.
A coercion of a record of a want, a from,
a form, and an SELD.
And the SELD is a TEXT with an at sign.
And the at sign is our substitution.
That means since this is the first at
sign that's encountered in the text,
substitute in the first
following parameter in the call.
And way down at the bottom of the screen,
the first parameter is doc name.
So what it will do is it will take
doc name as a pointer to text.
And it will create a text AEDESC or
text descriptor for the SELD.
So here, if you want to build an object
specifier with the value in it,
with a nested object specifier,
you can do it in one call.
Similarly, you can build whole
Apple events that way.
AE Build Apple Event looks a whole
lot like AE Create Apple Event,
except it takes,
instead of giving you pretty
much an empty Apple event,
you then have to fill in,
here's the direct parameter,
and here are the optional parameters,
and here are my other attributes.
You give it the event
class and the event code.
You give it the information,
the target information,
the type and a pointer to what
it is and the size of that,
the flags of what,
the return flag and the transaction flag,
and then you pass it a string.
And this string says basically,
our direct parameter,
the quote dash dash dash end quote,
is an alias.
And I'm going to show you how to do that.
And I'm going to substitute in a handle,
because the double ats,
and that means the first
parameter following the string
had better be an alias handle,
and in that case it is.
And what this will do is it will
build an Apple event with the direct
parameter with an alias handle in that,
and in one call.
And that saves you two additional calls
and a dispose of a transitory descriptor.
And this will make,
if you're creating Apple events
to send to yourself,
using AE Build is going
to be a lot easier.
going to really speed things up.
Let me show you the
first demo on demo one,
if we can get that up on both screens.
I have here our venerable
simple text project.
And let me go to...
Where SimpleText has an event
to send an open Apple event.
I'm not exactly sure
what they use it for,
but I found it in here,
so I decided to demo it.
And they do a lot of things.
They null out all of the
descriptors they build.
Then they have to get current process
and then create a descriptor and then
create an Apple event and then put
the parameter in as the direct object.
And then they have to
dispose of it later.
And it gets to be a lot of work.
Well, what we can do is we've got a
replacement that uses AE helpers here.
And we can just find all of this.
And notice what we do here in our
replacement is we call AE build
Apple event with the direct parameter
and a single at sign and then the list
that we've already got of things to open.
So we save a couple of descriptors,
we save having to dispose them,
we save building an extra handle.
It just makes it a lot easier to do that.
It makes that much easier to implement.
There's another big package in A.E.
Helpers called the A.E.
Streams Package.
And the Streams Package is a lot
of calls for building a deep A.E.
descriptor incrementally,
little by little.
And it basically works in an open, write,
close kind of protocol.
And if you're being nested, you open,
write, open, write, open, write, write,
write, close, close, close.
There are a bunch of calls,
basically open, write,
and close for each kind of thing.
in your writing.
And if you want to use them,
basically this is what
the code looks like.
You open, you write, you write,
you open a sub-record, you write,
you write, you write, you write,
you write, you close,
you write some more, you write some more,
you close, you close, and you're done.
And this is more efficient than having
to get all of the things that you
need collected together at one time,
and then creating a desk,
and then putting that
desk into another desk,
desk into another desk.
This saves copies,
especially if you have a streaming
model in the first place,
and if you don't want to make multiple
copies of large chunks of information,
this allows you to stream into
a descriptor without having
to make multiple copies of
large amount of information.
It's a little more complex.
It'll be used in more rare circumstances.
We actually use a lot of
this inside AppleScript,
but now it's available
to you in the internet.
It's called the AE Helpers package.
So let me tell you
what this means to you.
For developers, for scripters,
it doesn't mean anything.
Hopefully it will mean that the
applications that you're scripting
will work a little better.
To developers,
it means that if you've got
code that relies on AE Gizmos,
you can port it to Mac OS X or to
Carbon applications on Mac OS 9 without
having to carry on that old link library.
And with the AE Print facility that I'm
going to show you more of a little later,
it helps you debug because
you can actually see it.
You can see what's going on inside
your descriptors in a printf function.
So let's move on to the next one,
support for the double as problem.
How many of you have run into
this in real life when you ask an
application from a script to give
you some value as some other type,
and it gives you a list of things of that
value and then complains that it can't
coerce that list into what you asked for?
Fair number have run into that.
That's because the as term is
used in two ways in AppleScript.
One, it's a binary coercion operator.
Take this and coerce it to that type.
And second,
it's used as a parameter to events.
And when it's used as
a parameter to events,
AppleScript isn't really
smart enough to say,
oh, I'm going to use this.
The application must have handled that,
so I'm not going to do
an additional coercion.
It tries to be too helpful.
It knows that you want, for example,
the files as file
specifications or as aliases.
So it takes the result and it tries
to coerce it to what you ask for,
even if the result is a list.
And so you get one of two things.
One is you either get a coercion
error or you get a bad coercion.
For example,
if you ask for things as strings,
it's going to take this list,
and if the list can be
coerced to a string,
it'll do it.
Which isn't nice if you were asking
for the file names of every file
and you get one string with all the
file names concatenated together.
So this is primarily troublesome for
plural key forms or whose clauses,
which are really the most useful things,
because whose clauses let
the application do the work
without you having to iterate.
In order to work around this,
you have to iterate,
you have to send more events.
It's much slower,
and it forces scripters to
write unnecessarily slow loops.
So we've got a solution,
and the solution is,
in your applications,
if you handled the as parameter,
all you have to do is to put an
optional parameter in the reply
of the getData event saying,
I handled the as parameter.
And AppleScript will
look at that and say,
hey, somebody handled the as parameter,
and it won't try to
do the coercion again.
It's actually very straightforward.
And it's compatible,
so that if your application
doesn't supply it,
AppleScript will do it the old way.
Scripts that didn't work
will continue not to work,
and scripts that did use the
workaround will continue to work.
So that if you do this,
let your scripters know that you do this,
so that they won't have to
use the workarounds anymore.
So let me show you how it works.
Once again,
we're in our simple text application.
Oh no,
we're not in our simple text application,
because we have a different
application for this.
To demo this,
we're using Quinn's vulnerable Moro SL.
And more OSL is a lovely framework for
building very scriptable applications.
And one of the things,
and let's just show an example of
more OSL and run the application.
And here's a script.
It makes three new windows,
and it gets the name of
every window as string,
right?
Well, this is a classic double as case.
Or let's say, I think that'll work.
So this makes three new windows,
window A, window B, window C,
and it returns the name of
every window as Unicode text.
But what happened is that MoroSL gave
me the name of every window as a
list of three Unicode text items,
and then AppleScript said, oh,
it wants that list as Unicode text.
So it concatenated them all
into one Unicode text string.
So when my application
has four windows named
CBA and Untitled One.
What I get is a single string
that says CBA Untitled One.
That's not very helpful.
[Transcript missing]
And what we do is right here,
if this is a get data event,
and if it has an as parameter,
we took care of it.
And so what we do is we
basically put the IDAS,
the I did as parameter,
as true into the reply.
Okay.
And that's basically all we do.
Let's quit the application
and rebuild it.
And run it again.
And this time when we run the script.
You see our result is a list
of four Unicode text strings,
which is pretty much what we wanted.
We wanted it as four Unicode text.
So thank you, Quinn,
for providing a great framework.
So it's really simple.
If your application handled the as,
all you do is put IDAS true in the reply,
and there you go.
And we have the slides back.
What this means to you is you can choose,
if you did the coercion,
to let AppleScript know
that you did it or not.
What this means to scripters is that
applications should improve and you
should be able to use fewer workarounds,
fewer loops, and use more applications'
native capabilities.
Okay?
Now, I got some Unicode text there,
and you saw that the Unicode text all
got concatenated together as a string.
Well, that's something that didn't
happen prior to AppleScript 1.6.
Unicode class support is something
that we added in 1.6 primarily to
handle what's going on with the finder.
The finder 10 now returns all
file names as Unicode text.
AppleScript 1.4.3 could take these,
and it could send them
to other applications,
but it displayed them as data, Chevron,
UTXT, and then a bunch of hexadecimal.
It was better than nothing,
but it wasn't great.
1.5 and 1.5.5 added some
Unicode text support,
but it was broken into two.
It was broken into two in some places,
and it didn't have any of
the concatenation operations.
It didn't have the substring operations.
It didn't do anything
that you wanted it to do.
When we realized that if you were
running Mac OS 9 scripts on Mac OS X,
and the only finder around
was the Mac OS X finder,
and the Mac OS X finder always
returned Unicode file names,
and your scripts wanted to take file
names and concatenate them and piece them
apart and do all these things with them,
those scripts.
Those scripts would break unless
we could do full Unicode text.
So we moved that to high priority,
and we implemented it in 1.6,
both for 9 and for 10.
So Unicode strings for the
scripter have character,
word, paragraph, and text item elements,
just like strings.
They have a length property,
They have coercions to lists, records,
strings, style text, and number.
They have the concatenation operator.
They have a number of
comparison operators.
Their comparisons obey
the considerations,
but they actually obey the considerations
according to Unicode comparison rules,
not the styled text comparison rules.
So less than,
greater than may be interpreted
differently for Unicode text than you
would expect it to be for style text,
especially when it comes
to things like case.
And they support all of the key forms,
absolute position, the first, last,
middle, sum, every, and range.
Characters 1 through
negative 2 of Unicode text.
Some character of Unicode text.
We'll pick one out of the middle.
Chris Nebel always wants
to do some integerization.
and have that generate a random number,
but that's a different item.
So if we could have the
Demo 1 machine up again.
Quit this fine application.
So here's a script that scripts
the finder to get a name.
We'll get the class of the file name.
That's not what I wanted.
I wanted the class.
The class of the file
name is Unicode text.
I can get the individual
characters of the file name.
This is a hack here because for some
reason the finder is returning an extra
garbage Unicode character at the end of a
Japanese file name that it doesn't return
at the end of a non-Japanese file name.
So there's a hack here.
We haven't figured out what's going on.
But if
This is an English system.
It's set to English language,
but if I get the characters
of the file name,
I get them in Japanese in
the script editor.
I can say character 1
of the file name and...
I'm going a little off-road here
because I didn't practice this.
And I get the concatenation
of the Japanese character
and the English character.
So concatenation works.
As you saw before, range works.
If I say file one,
and I say every word...
[Transcript missing]
Let me tell you about some differences
between Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
Scripting editions are the first ones.
There are some new features in
Mac OS X that are actually really great.
They're going to be hard to get used to,
but they're really great.
The scripting editions folders follow the
locales model that Mac OS X introduced.
What that means is that there
isn't just a single system folder.
There's no unity between you,
your operating system,
and your machine anymore.
It used to be,
when I was a young lad and we
invented personal computers,
that if you had a machine,
the machine and your environment
and the operating system
software were all the same thing.
That's why it's so important to have
a system that's as good as a machine.
That's why there's one
system folder on Mac OS 9.
But that doesn't work
for shared machines,
and that doesn't work for
machines in network environments,
and that doesn't work for machines that
you want to keep running reliably for
long periods of time without screwing
around with the system software.
So Mac OS X separates those.
There is a system folder for the machine,
there's a system folder
for the operating system,
and there's a system folder
for each individual user.
And when you log in as that user,
you get your own special
system extensions and editions.
And we followed this model in that there
are at least three scripting editions
folders on every Mac OS X system,
sometimes five.
The three are systems, libraries,
scripting editions, which is the one the
operating system provides,
and that's the one pre-populated
with Apple editions,
and that's where the
standard editions are.
And we followed this model
in that there are systems,
libraries, scripting editions,
which is common to that machine
and which is changeable.
If you're an administrator,
you can put new scripting
editions in there,
and they will be available by all
users on that machine without having
to change what's in your scripting
editions folder in your operating system.
So that if you really want to get
back to a clean default machine,
just throw out slash library
slash scripting editions,
and the OS will be the
way it was shipped.
You don't have to hunt through, you know,
was this a system one?
Or was this something I added?
And then if you've got
multiple users on the machine,
every user has their own
in their user folder,
in their libraries folder,
they can have a scripting
editions folder.
And if they populate that
with scripting editions,
those will be available
just to that user,
but they won't be
available to other users.
So if you've got a machine that you
want to use as a graphics processing
workstation sometimes or as a
database machine some other times,
and they have different scripts.
And they might conflict.
You can have some in one and some in
another and just log in as a different
user and you get a different set and
you can keep conflicting ones apart.
It's actually a very useful structure.
The code model for writing
scripting editions,
if you're a developer, is different,
and this is a little problematic.
On Mac OS X, all code must be Carbon.
On Mac OS 9,
system code and scripting editions
are system code because they can
be invoked by any application,
cannot be Carbon.
And so that means it's technically
impossible to write a scripting edition
that will work on both 9 and 10.
And so don't even try it.
It's just not worth it.
If you want to ship
Mac OS X scripting editions,
you have to take your
Mac OS 9 scripting edition,
carbonize it, package it for Mac OS X,
and ship it for Mac OS X.
And they'll be separate.
Scripting editions for Mac OS X can
be either the CFM model that
you build with CodeWarrior,
or they can be the Mach-O model
that you build with Project Builder.
And they can be flat, single file,
or they can be packaged.
In bundles,
if you went to the application
packaging and extensions,
they're actually bundles, not packages,
because packages are applications,
but that's a different thing
I don't quite understand yet.
They're packages.
They're not bundles.
They are packages.
Okay.
They are bundles that are packages.
But theoretically,
you could build a package that
had both the classic and the
Mac OS X deliverable in it,
but that would be kind of useless.
It would be helpful for you to
upload and download just one copy,
but the user would have to put it
both in their Mac OS X scripting
editions folder and in their
Mac OS 9 scripting editions folder.
And so you'd have a copy of a useless
scripting edition in each of the folders.
You'd have four copies of the code.
When you only really need to have two,
it's just not worth it.
So we don't recommend that.
If you have old scripting editions,
you want to migrate to 10.
Migrate them to Carbon and ship them as
Mac OS X only is the right way to do it.
Access to scripting editions
is really interesting.
I tried to go through this last year
and I think I confused more people,
including myself, than I got clear.
Mac OS 9 and Classic really
behave as always.
Classic applications will only have
access to classic scripting editions.
Mac OS X scripts will have access to the
Mac OS X scripting editions in all of
the Mac OS X scripting editions folders.
And they can get at Mac OS 9
scripting editions by targeting a
Mac OS 9 application with an event.
So if you send an event from 10 to 9,
from a 10 script to a 9 application,
and that event is a
scripting edition event,
it will execute with
9 scripting editions.
Which is both important to know if you
want to invoke the 9 scripting edition,
and important to know if you
don't have a 10 equivalent of it.
The scripting edition
will get invoked in that.
So if you say, tell application launcher,
display dialog, display dialog will
happen in the 9 space.
It will happen in classic,
and the display dialog you'll
get is 9's display dialog,
not 10's display dialog,
so it will come out platinum, not Aqua.
Important to know.
Another important thing to know
is that Mac OS X applications
don't execute scripting additions
in their own application space.
In fact, most Mac OS X applications don't
know about scripting additions.
And so AppleScript in Mac OS X,
if it sends a scripting addition event to
an application and the application says,
"I didn't handle that event,"
then AppleScript re-dispatches
the scripting addition event
to the sending application.
To get executed in the
sending applications process.
So if, sorry,
I'm going back a little bit.
To execute a scripting edition in 9,
you've got to do two things.
You've got to target a
Mac OS 9 application,
and what Doug Korns of our group
tends to do is he puts Launcher
in the startup items folder.
And Launcher is a great application
because you can target it with scripts,
it always hangs around,
it's relatively unobtrusive,
and it's useful for launching your
Mac OS 9 applications in Classic.
And then he uses the using terms
from clause to actually target,
to actually compile the script.
So basically,
you have to do a little setup
to actually get at Launcher.
You tell the Launcher,
using terms from the
real scripting edition,
Get monitor depth or something like that.
And then end and end.
And this script,
if you actually run it in
10 with classic running,
it will send an event
over to the launcher.
Launcher will execute it in classic.
It will execute even a 68K scripting
edition and return the result
back to your Mac OS X script.
So if you want to use your old classic
scripting editions for Mac OS X scripts,
this is the structure
that you use to do them.
On Mac OS X,
scripting editions aren't loaded
in the system heap at startup time
because there is no system heap and
there basically is no startup time.
So we can't do that.
We were thinking of loading
scripting editions behind the
back of every application,
but that would burden every
application launch time with the
scripting edition's load time,
and applications on 10 don't need
to do more work at launch time.
We don't want to add
another bounce just for us.
So, to make us not have our own
bounce for every application,
applications don't load
scripting editions,
and when we send an application
a scripting edition command,
if it doesn't handle it,
then we execute it basically ourselves
in the current application context.
So, an application, if it chooses to,
if it's an OSA client,
if it's going to execute scripts,
and it would be better off to execute
scripting editions in its own context,
it'll have to do that.
So, if it does have scripting editions,
if not, we'll just handle it for it.
The result to the scripter
should be transparent,
and the result to the programmer should
be that your application launches faster,
and that people can send all sorts of
scripting editions to your application.
You just won't handle them.
You'll never even see them,
but the scripter will
have the same result.
Let's see how that works.
So here I've got a couple
of scripting additions.
I guess I can quit this.
And I'll go to the finder
and go to my home directory
and to my libraries folder.
And note that I don't have a
scripting additions folder here.
So I have to create one.
And for now, I didn't add a space.
That's an oversight that
we hope to be able to fix.
And I take a scripting edition,
and I drop it in my
scripting editions folder.
So now I have access to that
scripting edition's terminology,
and I can run it, and it works.
And what's interesting is that...
I still have access to scripting
editions from all other applications.
Let me go down and see if
Simple Text is still running here.
So here's Simple Text.
Here's that script.
I bet you didn't know
Simple Text had this option,
did you?
So you can see that SimpleText has
access to that scripting edition too.
Okay?
Now, the Finder,
The Finder doesn't execute scripts,
so it doesn't have
scripting editions loaded.
So,
this Open for Access scripting edition
and this Parse XML scripting edition
commands will be sent to the Finder,
but the Finder's going to say,
"I don't handle these."
But instead of getting an error,
event not handled,
AppleScript will just resend
it to the script editor.
The script editor will execute it,
and you get the right results.
And if you look at the event log,
You'll see that you don't
even see that redispatch.
It thinks it's telling the finder,
it thinks the finder's executing it,
but the finder is not, script editor is,
you're just getting the right result.
So what this means to developers
is that you should port your
scripting editions to Carbon in
order to get them on Mac OS X.
And you need to release both separate
Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X versions
of your scripting editions.
To scripters, what this means is,
you know, for optimum benefit,
you could and should move your scripting
edition calls out of your tell blocks.
Since if they're sent to an application
that doesn't understand them,
they're just going to be redispatched
to the script application anyway.
You might as well move
them out of your telblocks.
It'll just save an extra event
send to the application for that.
And if you want to
target Mac OS 9 editions,
you need to enclose those in a
telblock for the Mac OS 9 edition.
A couple more differences in
Mac OS X that I want to cover
before we end and go to questions.
One is the packages issue.
Mac OS X apps are folders, not files.
As you heard in the bundles and
extensions discussion on Friday,
this is for being able to work on
non-HFS file systems and being able to
transport things over the network without
having resource forks and types and
creators and things like that mangled.
But there are some key differences
there because your scripts,
as scripters,
probably assume that you're not
going to be able to do that.
That if you get an application,
it's a file.
It's not a file.
Info 4 will report that the
application is a directory.
If you ask for path 2
with an application,
it's going to have a colon at the end.
And it's going to end in .app actually.
It's going to end in .app colon because
that's its real name on the file system.
You are going to see differences between
what the real thing is on the disk
from what the user sees in the finder.
Now,
we're going to work on... showing you
both versions and giving you access to
what the truth is and what the user sees.
We need some help from the finder
and from the system in doing that.
That will come in subsequent versions.
But for now,
remember that when you use AppleScript,
AppleScript will tell you
the truth of the file system
in that an app is a folder.
It ends in a colon and it ends
in .app even if it doesn't
look like that in the finder.
Paths and extensions.
We didn't change,
and we're still using most
of the Carbon APIs for this,
we didn't change the way that
we interpret and show things
to the user in Mac OS X.
If you're accustomed to
colon-separated path names,
you get colon-separated path names,
so your scripts that parse
colon paths will still work.
If you ask the finder for every disk,
you're going to get the
disks on your desktop,
and you can start a colon-delimited
path with those disk names.
That's not the way the
file system really is,
though.
The file system really starts at slash,
and those disks are in slash
volume slash something.
We debated long and hard about whether to
give you access to both colon-delimited
and slash-delimited file names,
and we thought that it was just
going to be a total nightmare
for scripters to do that.
So we're maintaining for
the file and alias types,
the colon-delimited file name,
and for path two,
and anything that returns
the file name as a string.
We're going to continue to do that.
We will probably not ever
support slash-delimited paths,
but we'll support file URLs,
which I'll talk about
in the next session.
The Finder hides file extensions.
It hides .app now.
It will probably hide other
extensions in the future.
Info 4, if you want to do anything
in the file system,
you really need the full
name with the extension.
So if you say tell app simple text,
we're doing a nice thing by not
making you type simple text .app,
but the real name of the
application is simple text .app.
Info 4 will tell you that.
Path 2, Info 4 will require that.
Path 2 will tell you that.
And in future releases,
we'll provide you more information
on what the file extension is
and whether the file extension is
showing or not in order to enable
your scripts to do the right thing.
We are using extensions
more in AppleScript.
As was talked about in the
presentation on Wednesday,
extensions are not required,
but if present, they'll be interpreted.
So if you get a script across
the internet that has no type,
no creator, but ends in .script and
you double-click it,
the script editor will open and it
will read it as a compiled script.
So scpt is our compiled script file.
.applescript is our uncompiled
raw text of AppleScript,
and I assume that there will
be other .script files that
may or may not be opened in the
script editor for other types.
And we have two special
types for terminologies.
.osax is a scripting edition,
and .asdictionary is for anything else
that has an AppleScript dictionary,
whether or not it has
code attached to it.
For now,
if the user wants the extension on it,
the user has to add
the extension manually.
We don't add any
extensions automatically.
As the system evolves to allow
extensions to be added automatically,
if the user desires that,
we'll take advantage of that.
But for now,
we don't put one on automatically.
If the user wants one, they can use it.
And the script editor will
continue to set the type and
creator of new files it creates,
so that those files can be
used on a Mac OS 9 system.
And the AppleScript 1.6,
the Mac OS 9 version,
will also understand files
without type and creator,
but only in extension.
So let me tell you what we're working
on before we close and go to questions.
Our number one priority is getting
more Apple applications scriptable.
AppleScript itself, we think,
is pretty good.
We offered a solid product.
It offers high degree of
compatibility with Mac OS 9.
It's reasonably bug-free,
but it's the sound of one hand clapping.
Until you can script the finder and
the preferences and mail and connect
to the Internet and choose printers,
we don't think AppleScript is
done on Mac OS X,
and so we're continuing
to work on those things.
We think the loss of networked
Apple events is a big hole.
We're working on that.
That looks very good for
the short-term future,
is getting networked
Apple events back in.
We want to more smoothly integrate
with features of Mac OS X.
Paths and extensions are one.
And the other capabilities of
Mac OS X that allow you to,
say, execute things in the terminal.
Let me just show you,
because this is a little hack
that somebody put together,
but hacks are good, right?
As I told you, there are separate
folders in each domain,
and there's a components
folder in your library domain.
And you can take, for example...
A new OSA component and just drop it
in your /library/components folder.
And when you run the script editor,
you have multiple items
here in your pop-up,
so you have more than one OSA language.
But this isn't Mark Aldrich's JavaScript,
this is something called Bundle Shell.
And I can type ps-ax, for example,
and get a list of the processes
running on the machine.
This is actually Bundle Shell.
This is a cheap little demo which
just takes the script and executes
it from the Unix command line and
takes the result and pipes it back.
Just to prove it's Unix.
There we go.
There's your password file.
Back to the slides, please.
So that's what I mean by more
integration with Mac OS X.
And then there are two perennial
projects that I've been talking about
forever and we're still working on.
As soon as they stop revving the
OS so we can sit and work on our own
code for a while rather than port,
we'll get through these.
But a plug-in model for applications
so that your applications can
more easily support plug-ins.
And for AppleScript itself,
so we can extend things like adding a
full Unicode class without having to
go into the bowels of AppleScript and
hack everything ourselves.
And then full object
model support for lists,
records, and strings and other classes.
Because we know that scripters
are really confused by using the
object model in applications,
but they can't delete a
character from a string,
for example.
So in summary,
AppleScript in Mac OS X is pretty useful.
It's pretty reliable.
It's got everything that
the 9 version has got.
It works pretty well.
We lack the scriptable
applications on the Apple side,
and we're getting good scriptable
applications on the third-party side.
We're continuing to add
new stuff to AppleScript.
We're not just sitting still
with the implementation,
but we are evolving it
as we get a chance to,
and we're trying to do so in a compatible
way so that your scripts continue to run.
Mac OS X and classic versions
will stay in sync for a while.
While you are migrating
your solutions from 9 to 10,
we will continue to make sure that your
scripts can run in either environment.
There will be some point in the future
where we'll discontinue 9 support,
but that's in the distant future,
not in the near future.
And the Mac OS X version
will support new features and
idiosyncrasies of the Mac OS,
and that will only be
in the Mac OS X version.
So we'll start to diverge a little.
We're not going to... We're
not going to imbue 9 with all
sorts of 10-like features,
but we will make sure that 9
and 10 remain somewhat parallel.
There's another session coming
up in about half an hour,
which is the
Building AppleScript Application session.
If you are writing a scriptable
application or writing an OSA client,
that session is for you.
If you are a scripter,
go out and get a soda, play some pinball,
and we'll see you at the
feedback forum at 5 o'clock,
which will be in room C, which is...
If you have questions,
I'm always available.
I'm the middle guy.
Our technology manager is Jason Yeo,
who is across the street doing
Darwin presentations right now.
And our esteemed marketing guy,
Sal Sagoian.
As always, the AppleScript implementers
and AppleScript users lists are
great places to get advice from
other scripters or programmers.
And I frequent the developers,
the implementers list quite a bit,
and Chris Nebel is on the users
list quite frequently as well.